[Music]
welcome to topcast
episode three of my breakdown my
readings and reflections on the science
of cannon can't by kiara marletto
this is the book explaining the new
physics of constructor theory the new
theory of constructive theory it's
really much broader than merely physics
by david deutsch chiara maletto
and their collaborators in the last two
episodes we've looked at
chapter one and in that chapter in the
last episode we looked at
how dynamical laws and initial
conditions
actually work within physics in order to
be able to provide you with
a prediction of what's going to happen
as some kind of
physical system evolves over time
today we're moving on to chapter two and
chiara is going to explain the
limitations of that approach as well as
the benefits of that approach and why
that approach has worked
so well hitherto until now so without
much more preamble i'm going to get
straight
into the reading i'm going to do a fair
bit probably about
50 50 reading and commentary today i'm
certainly not reading the entire chapter
you need to buy the book for that okay
so let's begin
chapter two is called beyond laws of
motion
question mark and chiara writes as an
introduction to this chapter
where i explain the logic of the
traditional conception of physics
which uses exclusively explanations by
dynamical laws
and supplementary conditions white
cannot capture counterfactuals such as
information work and heat or knowledge
and why physics needs to resort to a
radically different approach
based on counter factuals statements
about what is possible or
impossible to incorporate those entities
in an exact
and fundamental way now immediately i'm
skipping
a few pages as i just suggested
what kiara does in these first few pages
is describe people of the
past who are somewhat primitive to us i
suppose
and how they struggled to survive and
encountered problems
but at least they had one thing better
than other animals
they possessed knowledge so people of
the past early explorers
in particular that's the example that
she uses had knowledge that enabled them
to make predictions predictions of the
weather
of the conditions of the seas and in
particular of the winds to enable them
to
navigate the ocean somewhat better than
people who didn't have such
knowledge and so as chiara goes on to
write
knowledge allowed them to make
predictions about
favorable winds and currents about where
they might encounter rocks or dangerous
shallows about how long their journey
would last
such predictions tamed some of their
doubts and fears
and ease them through perils and
uncertainties
as for those early explorers predictions
are still the most
sought after output of science and of
physics in particular
they will be one of the focuses of this
chapter i shall explain the logic of the
traditional way of making predictions
in physics show its limitations and
suggest
how counterfactuals can remedy some of
those limitations
a prediction in physics as well as in
other fields is a conjecture about
some piece of information that is not
known prior to the prediction
like any conjecture a prediction could
be false
as one might discover by checking
whether the prediction is or is not
met in reality false does not imply
useless
pausing there just my reflection on this
remember that chiara
like david like myself are perperians
so all knowledge is conjectural or any
claim that we make is conjectural
anything that comes out of your mouth
or out of your pen or out of your
computer is going to be
conjectural and that includes
predictions
so even if you have a robust scientific
theory
a good theory of physics for example
that allows you to make predictions the
predictions themselves
well they're still conjectures as well
because they're being derived
from a conjectured explanation so they
can't be anything more than conjectures
they're not more certain they're not
going to give you
more reliable knowledge or anything like
that what they're going to do
is tell you what's going to happen on
the assumption
that this particular theory of in this
case
physics is true so it's so the
prediction
works on the assumption that the
underlying explanation works
and even then that you haven't made an
error somewhere or other in
moving from your explanation to your
prediction and this brings me to
a slight distinction here that chiaro
doesn't make in the science of canon
can't but
i've made elsewhere following the
beginning of infinity for example
that there are species of guesses about
the future
there are predictions which are
something like
in in my words derivations logical
derivations
given a good typically scientific theory
and in opposition to this there are
prophecies
now prophecies come in various kinds
they might come
completely uncoupled from any
consideration
of good experimental knowledge and in
particular
they can come uncoupled from knowledge
about
knowledge a prophet is after all someone
who guesses about the future
either at random or in some cases and
this is the more technical sense that
david deutsch seems to use the word
prophecy is where the prophet purports
to explain what will happen in the
future
while ignoring the effects that people
might have
namely what knowledge they might create
scientists unfortunately can be prone to
this
which means politicians will be as well
because they tend to take scientists
very seriously
even when they're being prophetic and
we'll come to some examples of this
but long-term predictions about the
behavior of civilizations or what might
happen to
earth or even the region around earth
given the existence of people who are
bringing in to existence knowledge which
can create technology which can change
the outcome of whatever your prediction
is going to be
is always something that needs to be
kept in mind and something that
politicians for example the people whose
hands are on
the levers of economic power to a large
extent
can end up making decisions based upon
the
prophecies of scientists who assume
that no such technology and no such
creativity can ever affect their
derivations from their otherwise usually
good
scientific theories and of course that's
in the best case
that's in the case where the scientist
is really using a
good scientific theory rather than a
hypothesis which might
indeed not contain a good explanation
at the heart of it okay let's continue
on this line that
kiara has about prediction and she
writes
an example of a false but far from
useless
prediction in maritime history is that
made by christopher columbus in the 15th
century
he predicted that by traveling westwards
from the coasts of europe one could
reach the east
the indies his specific prediction was
as we know erroneous or to be precise
incomplete he had not guessed that
another continent was in the way in fact
columbus's
ocean exploration is how renaissance
europe discovered the americas
still his prediction was powerful useful
and contained
some truth had he been able to continue
traveling westwards beyond america
or thousands more miles south around
cape horn
he would have reached india pausing
there just my reflection
uh this is a point i've made elsewhere
before as well i should stop saying that
but i tend to repeat myself in various
uh podcasts
i should add here okay i should add to
this
idea of a false but far from useless
prediction
of course lots of things in physics like
for example
any prediction made from newton's theory
must
strictly speaking turn out false
because the theory itself is false but
that doesn't make it useless and it
doesn't make it a
bad explanation either it's a false
explanation
but it's very very very useful and it
contains
some truth as that phrase there that
chiara has used
comes into its own containing some truth
not a quantity of truth that we can
measure or anything like that
and in fact not only are the
predictions from newton's theory not
useless they can sometimes be more
useful
in a sense depending upon your problem
situation
than the more true theory the more
accurate theory the
best explanation which is einstein's
relativity in this particular case
and it's all to do with precision and
perhaps
efficiency so if you want to do
something like let's say determine the
cause of a car accident because you're a
crash scene investigator working with
the police and you need to
retrodict what happened what what
previously happened you arrive on the
scene and it's just a
mangled wreckage of two cars that have
crashed into each other
and now you're trying to figure out
based upon the amount of damage done and
the tire marks and so on the evidence
that you've got there before you
to determine whether or not if one or
both of the
drivers were breaking laws in some way
like breaking the speed limit
then strictly speaking if you really
wanted to get the
highest precision most accurate most
correct answer you should be using
einstein's special relativity but no
one's going to do that
no one's actually going to do that
because although your answer would be
closer to the actual truth of the matter
presuming that all your assumptions are
correct as well it's going to be
swamped by the errors in your
assumptions anyway
even if you had perfect assumptions
about what was going on and you were
able to find out the velocity of these
cars prior to the crash to figure
out if either of the parties had been
breaking the law
newtonian physics is going to do just as
well in our court of law to try and
make your case because the difference
between
the two answers that you get for the
velocities of the cars
will be found in like the fifth decimal
place or something a
fraction of a percentage difference
between them it only becomes significant
especially the effects of special
relativity only become significant once
the velocity
gets really really high so this is why
in fact the false theory can sometimes
be preferable because more people will
i understand it b be able to apply it
more efficiently and quickly especially
if
time is a factor and c is going to be
well within the error bars we might say
of
whatever the assumptions might be in the
first place so the
differences between special relativity
and
newtonian physics are going to be
completely
swamped by all the other elasticity in
the calculation
namely what you assume to begin with and
what the evidence
enables you to measure as a matter of
fact okay back to the book
and kiara writes a notorious case of a
useless prediction appears in the legend
of the
and i'm going to butcher this completely
cumian sibil
the priestess who resided in the
apollonian oracle at cumae
an ancient greek colony where naples is
today
the story goes that a pilgrim came to
her asking for a prediction
about whether he would return safely
from an imminent war
this was the sybil's reply ibis radibus
non-morierus in bello the cryptic
sentence contains a prediction
which is what the pilgrim was hoping for
but unfortunately for the pilgrim
it is hopelessly vague according to
where one pauses
a after radibus or after none
that statement can have two completely
different meanings one is
you will go you will not come back you
will die at war
the other is you will go you will come
back you will not die at war
apparently the statement was uttered
only once and with a flat tone of voice
so it was impossible to tell which one
of the two meanings it had
okay pausing there just my reflection
it's of course quite typical for an
ancient prophet to be vague modern
prophets of course
are similarly vague at times all the
claims of looming disasters of various
kinds economic environmental
civilizational ai apocalypse it's always
coming but we're never really told
precisely when or by what means
or exactly what the nature of the
disaster will be
it's all prophecy perhaps one step up
from sybil's there but not much
while sybil's is kind of vacuous because
it's a contradiction
there's two competing predictions both
of which rule the other one out
at least uh our modern day prophets are
sometimes
making an actual claim of a thing that
is purportedly
going to happen for example the ai will
kill us and take over the world
of course many do not quite do this many
make
civil light claims that being ai
might kill us and take over the world or
global warming
might melt all the polarized caps before
we choose to do anything about it
but of course anything might be the case
anything not precluded by the laws of
physics
and all that might be the case
back to the book chiara writes what is
the difference between columbus's
predictions
and the sybils the former is powerful
and worthy even if false
the latter useless but why exactly the
answer shall not be found by examining
the contents of the predictions
themselves
we have to go deeper the difference lies
in what the predictions rely on
it lies in the underlying explanations
the prophecy of the cumulan sybil did
not rely on an offer or explanation of
why the pilgrim would or would not
come back from war without any further
explanation it is impossible to tell
which of the two opposite meanings that
statement has
columbus's prediction instead relied on
a good explanation
that the earth was round pausing there
just again
yeah and to this i would add
that even if there's a good explanation
on offer about the future
it sometimes needs to take into account
other good
explanations which if it ignores them
will get the prediction wrong
the one i mention often is the
prediction quite scientific in a in a
sense
that the sun will eventually run out of
hydrogen fuel expanded to a red giant
and boil all the oceans of the earth
as it does so that seems like a
reasonable prediction for five billion
years hence
given what we know which is quite robust
good explanations about stars like the
sun
the problem is it ignores what people
might do it ignores other good
explanations
it purports in other words to know a
future that creativity
may have an impact on it presumes that
creativity cannot possibly have an
impact upon
that scenario and by the way supposedly
the oceans will boil well before five
billion years hence due to increasing
temperature of the sun anyway
if we don't do anything about it that of
course is always the point
on this planet for as long as we're here
any prediction is always
unless we don't do anything about it so
any prediction in science is going to
come true
unless we do something about it but we
will
often do something about it by the way
you can simply google when will the
oceans boil to find
a debate over the time frame it's about
a billion years or so apparently
back to the book chiara writes the
quality of a prediction depends
ultimately on the underlying explanation
this point is so important that we need
to spend a little time reflecting on it
it is just like what happens on a long
hike when you reach a spot with a
wonderful view
it is good to pause and take a little
rest while contemplating the beauty of
the landscape
from that particular place our gaze now
moves
far away from the gloomy land of oracles
and comes to rest on a boundless
shimmering prairie a field where the
connection between good explanations
and powerful predictions is clear and
immediate
it is the field of physics predictions
in physics are powerful
they supersede religious and
mythological predictions
and also those made by rules of thumb
rules such as
in order to grow good carrots in your
garden you need to sow carrot seeds in
february
often laws of physics are so general
that they make claims about the universe
as a whole
it's pausing there i'm not going to read
the next section it's an interesting
story it's the story of the discovery of
neptune and the discovery of neptune was
basically about the fact that
as uranus went around the sun or uranus
as some people say
as it went around the sun its orbit
deviated from what was predicted from
newtonian physics
and this led astronomers to be able to
predict
where neptune should be found and
training their telescopes towards that
region of space
indeed they found it and this was so
successful of course that um
it led scientists later on to presume
that a similar effect was happening with
mercury
and so they presumed that there was this
hidden planet that was perturbing the
orbit of mercury as it turned out no
such planet
was found or ever could be found or
indeed exists because the solution there
was not another planet
perturbing the orbit of mercury from
what was predicted by
newtonian physics but rather it's
because newtonian physics turns out to
be
false and you need general relativity to
get the
orbit right okay back to the book in
kiara writes
in physics and in science in general
both explanations and predictions must
satisfy
strict criteria in particular
explanations must generate predictions
that are testable
end quotes okay i haven't read much
there but i feel that this needs
lingering over she's just written there
in particular explanations must generate
predictions
that are testable now after years of
doing this
to me of course and to anyone who
listens to me
at all you'll be bored of
hearing something like that it's quite
clearly
the case this is in science
okay in science you need explanations
that generate testable predictions i'm
astonished
now that it still needs to be said and
this thesis still needs to be
defended not because we want to say that
science is the king of all subjects and
there's nothing else that's important
because we have testable theories and so
we are the superior subject
no nothing like that it's simply we need
testable theories
so that we have a measure by which we
can actually talk sensibly
about how to determine what is really
going on in the physical world
and which of our competing theories
is going to be the correct one or the
more correct one
and which one has been refuted if we've
got no experimental way
of refuting too good
explanations then how do we choose
between them how do we
take action scientifically now morality
on the other hand is not testable
and in many many cases you certainly
shouldn't go
testing moral claims it would be a great
mistake
for example we shouldn't be going out
and testing
what kind of torture actually causes
more suffering
on the one hand that's a scientific
question on the other it's a moral
question
but we shouldn't do it and no one should
do this there's all sorts of moral
things that we
shouldn't try to test the same is true
of
certain theories in economics certain
theories in
politics a claim like you know marxism
is true
it's not actually testable but to the
extent that it's already been tried it's
failed everywhere so there's no need to
keep on trying it because
there's a moral claim at the center of
it there are claims about
people that we know are false claims
about society that we know are false
there is science there is non-science
and there is pseudoscience morality is
non-science but that doesn't make it
unimportant it is
crucially important marxism on the other
hand
along with astrology is a pseudoscience
both of them can be dismissed as false
because they're bad explanations
and to the extent that anyone has ever
taken them seriously as explanations
they have suffered in the case of
astrology pursuing a
false system for directing one's life in
a particular way
when better ideas are actually on offer
and in the case of marxism well
the death of hundreds of millions of
people so there's a spectrum of bad
effects that these
pseudo-scientific ideas can have on
people but anyways
some people well as i've said before
let's face it by some people i actually
mean
some theoretical physicists get their
noses quite out of joint on this point
they want to argue that
testability is itself some kind of
antiquated notion
that we are attacking their favorite
ideas those
favorite ideas of theirs arising in a
sense out of physics
because we say they're not testable i've
seen people get upset that claiming
universes with other laws of physics are
not properly part of science because
they're not testable because we cannot
make an observation of them
or do a crucial experimental test of
them but there's no reason to be
upset about that metaphysics is
absolutely fine
and what wasn't testable yesterday might
turn out to be testable tomorrow if we
can figure out how
i think this almost needs to be written
on the walls of any
academy of the future let no one enter
here who is ignorant of areas
outside of science there are scientists
who think that being scientific
is a virtue in a way that being artistic
or being philosophical is not and so on
but mathematics for example is not
science constructing mathematical
structures that describe
alternative physical laws of a universe
that is not our own is
just that constructing mathematical
structure
it's not strictly doing science it's
doing
theoretical physics of a kind i guess
but this would just place that kind of
theoretical physics
within the realm of pure mathematics
which is absolutely fine
as i've said before pure mathematicians
hardy was one
have been proud of the fact that their
mathematics was
utterly disconnected from the real
physical world in a sense it was about
purely abstract things at least that's
what they thought
in hardy's case he actually said it and
i'll quote from his book a
mathematician's apology
he said quote i have never done anything
useful
no discovery of mine has made or is
likely to make
directly or indirectly for good or ill
the least
difference to the amenity of the world
end quote
and so he was he was proud of the fact
he was kind of like almost an
abstract artist he was just doing stuff
with his mind
disconnected from the physical world to
a large extent and he thought that
nothing about his mathematics could
possibly make a difference
but i'm just going to read from the
wikipedia article on hardy actually
and the wikipedia article says aside
from
formulating the hardy weinberg principle
in population genetics
hardy's famous work on integer
partitions
with his collaborator romana jan known
as the
hardy romanogen asymptotic formula has
been widely applied
in physics to find quantum partition
functions of atomic nuclei
first used by niels bohr to derive
thermodynamic functions
of non-interacting bose-einstein systems
though hardy wanted his maths to be pure
and devoid of any application
much of his work has found applications
in
other branches of science end quote and
so
even if you're doing pure mathematics or
you think you are it could be applied
later on if you think you're doing
metaphysics it could be applied later on
it's no
sin to be doing these things because
they might
come within the purview of science and
so actually hardy's work is now part of
science
so too for people working on megaverse
theories or the claims about alternative
laws of physics and alternative
universes it's all to the good
kind of like string theory at the moment
none of it seems to be testable
and so therefore strictly within part of
science so to speak
but the lesson of hardy's pure
mathematics should resonate
his work was important regardless of
whether or not it would eventually be
applied
that it was brought into science in a
sense eventually
just makes it now doubly important okay
back to the book
kiara writes perhaps you have noticed
that being testable is itself a counter
factual property
pertaining to what can be done with the
prediction there are indeed
counterfactuals at the heart of most
fundamental scientific theories end of
the process of scientific discovery
specifically testable means that it must
be possible to set up an experiment to
disprove the prediction
if it is false i.e if it does not match
what it's actually observed in reality
okay so end quote that's that's perfect
um
uh chiara then goes on in the book to
give some simple examples of what it
means to be testable in science i think
people listening to this
probably know uh what it means so we'll
skip over those
and she also goes over some untestable
ones like for example that
the universe might be supported on the
back of a dog or many dogs
or infinite dogs which is a variation of
that whole joke about
it's turtles all the way down okay these
metaphysical theories
that can't be tested okay all so far as
we know
can't be tested of course if we could
observe this dog on which the universe
was supported then it would be part of
the universe part of the observable
universe
and therefore it would be testable but
presuming that these things are outside
the universe and therefore
by definition outside of what we can
observe means they're untestable
okay so i'm skipping quite a substantial
bit
and going to the part where cair writes
quote
why is testability of predictions so
central to the progress of physics and
science in general
the reason is that it provides a
particularly
efficient way to find mistakes in the
explanations
and correct them i want to open a
digression to illustrate
how predictions explanations and testing
are all intertwined within the method
that allows science to make tentative
progress
to this end let me stir the cloudy water
in the pond of history and bring up the
spirit of the thinker
who pioneered the scientific method as
we know it galileo galilei
galileo's experiments to test his
predictions are striking for their
beauty and simplicity
he intended to test his theories
predictions about the motion of systems
against
those that aristotle had proposed in
antiquity
and which had been considered the
authority ever since
galileo's predictions were about the
motion of a hard
smooth bronze sphere left to roll inside
an inclined smooth
groove without friction in particular he
predicted that spheres of different
sizes or masses
would undergo the same motion down the
groove the same speed
in particular this prediction was in
sharp conflict with aristotle's theory
which predicted that spheres of
different masses would roll down with
different speeds
on the face of it aristotle's idea seems
intuitively true
which makes galileo's prediction all the
more interesting
okay pausing there and just skipping a
little bit as well and kara goes on to
explain how well this same idea
and the one that's usually taught in
science class
is about well if you've got a a small
mass one kilogram mass one kilogram
sphere of metal and you've got a large
mass a five kilogram sphere of metal and
you drop them simultaneously which one
hits the ground first
and the intuitive idea even amongst some
adults that i've done this with
who haven't learned physics for whatever
reason or have never done the experiment
think that the heavy one must hit the
ground first
and this kind it makes intuitive sense
the reason it makes intuitive sense is
because
of course people think of feathers and
leaves fluttering to the ground
and so they think that it's due to the
mass
now you have to try and eliminate air
resistance in order to do the experiment
properly but once you do
control the experiment as well as you
can then indeed you find that the two
masters hit the ground at the same time
brian cox does a wonderful version of
this with actual
feathers and bowling balls in a huge
vacuum chamber or put the
image up on the screen it's a youtube
and you can see in fact that the
feathers do fall to the ground at the
same time
as the ball does and i think there was
an astronaut of course as well
i've talked about this before who
dropped the feather and the hammer on
the moon
at the same time and i hit the ground at
the same time as well but you
you don't even need well you do need to
do the experiment to disprove the
different theories
but there is a thought experiment that
you can do as well
on the assumption that the rest of
physics uh is unchanged
and chiara talks about the thought
experiment and so let me read
the thought experiment quote from kiara
galileo reasoned like this if one joins
a
smaller sphere to a larger sphere via a
string
and then drops them both from a height
what happens according to aristotle is
that the smaller sphere has a smaller
velocity
in this thought experiment the smaller
sphere should lag
behind if the two spheres can fall down
for
long enough the smaller sphere would
slow down the larger one
by pulling on the string so the combined
system
made of two spheres would go down at a
speed that is slower
than that of the larger sphere by itself
but here is the glitch
this contradicts aristotle's idea that
that systems with larger masses should
have larger velocities
after all the system made of the two
connected spheres has a larger mass than
the largest sphere by itself
if aristotle's idea were true it should
be faster not slower as we concluded
therefore by this thought experiment
galileo was led to conclude
that aristotle's idea was false and that
spheres of different masses should
undergo the same motion when falling
freely
he then conjectured with another leap of
creativity that they should display the
same behavior when sliding down the
groove
pause there just might reflect my
version of this of this
this thought experiment if you like is
if you have
um let's say five
people who like to go skydiving they all
jump out of
the airplane now on aristotle's theory
the heavier that they are the faster
that they fall
presume they've all got the same mass so
therefore they all fall
at precisely the same rate now if
they're
skilled skydivers they can direct
themselves in such a way that they're
very close together and they could
literally put their arms out and hold
hands with each other
now do you regard that as a system of
five people with five
times the mass of any one of them and so
when they hold hands
do they suddenly speed up and then when
they let go of hands do they suddenly
slow down
if they do indeed speed up when they
hold hands where is the energy coming
from in order to increase their
acceleration
what's going on there i'm not sure why
aristotle himself didn't
think of things like this i don't know
probably because he was thinking of just
so much stuff
and that he uh didn't think too deeply
about
his physics aristotelian physics is a i
guess
it's a first attempt i was almost going
to say it's a good first time i don't
think it's a good first attempt
it's um it's not precise in any way i
don't know that he did much in the way
of
a quantitative analysis and he didn't do
experiments as well so that you know
not a good scientist aristotle find out
other things find it fine at other areas
of philosophy
i'm good at virtue ethics and that kind
of thing
bad physicist anyway kiara goes on to
explain how
galileo of course went on to test
the actual prediction that he made
against aristotle's ideas
by observation so he actually went and
did the experiment she doesn't mention
the leaning tower of pisa
maybe because that's a an
urban legend it's a myth maybe he didn't
actually drop things off the leaning
tower of pizza to see which one
hit the ground first but back to the
book
and chiara writes explanations whose
predictions are found
wrong in an experiment automatically
become problematic
and they are usually dismissed in favor
of alternative explanations
as mentioned in the first chapter
galileo's and newton's explanations
and the resulting predictions have an
important trait in common
their approach to explaining physical
reality is centered on what is usually
called a
law of motion a law of motion or a
dynamical law
is a description of where a system such
as a sphere or planet goes
given that its motion starts at a
certain point in space and time
think of a sequence of snapshots each of
which represents the state of that
system at different times
the law of motion provides the rule for
how the snapshots
are ordered in particular there will be
an initial
and a final snapshot representing the
starting and
ending states of the motion which in
physics jargon are called
initial conditions and final conditions
for instance
in the case of a ball fired by a cannon
the initial snapshot contains the ball
sitting inside the cannon
about to be fired the final snapshot
represents it when it lands on the
ground
typically any snapshot along the
sequence is explained in terms of its
predecessor
ultimately in terms of the initial
snapshot now all sequences of snapshots
described by known laws of motion
have a particular property each snapshot
has only one predecessor
and one successor in the sequence this
property is something physicists call
reversibility of dynamical laws once you
have gone all the way down the sequence
of snapshots
you can go back without any uncertainty
because each snapshot has one
predecessor
unlike in a garden or labyrinth with
forking paths therefore
no bifurcations occur along the line
there is no ambiguity
in how to go back and forth the
explanation by laws of motion
is the most traditional in physics it
was first introduced by galileo then it
became established with newton's laws
today the two most fundamental physical
theories general relativity and quantum
theory
are expressed via laws of motion too and
so are all other theories that
physicists
generally consider fundamental like
those governing electromagnetic fields
and elementary particles the long-term
success of the approach by laws of
motion
is remarkable its predictions are
extremely powerful
suppose for instance you are a general
about to attack a city built by robust
walls
which you want to batter down newton's
laws tell you exactly how to tilt the
cannon
in order to maximize the impact of its
projectiles
by predicting their motion in every
detail for example
they tell you that there are only two
possible paths available to the same
point of impact
for the cannonball with any particular
speed pausing there's my reflection if
you're interested in this this is all
this topic of projectile motion a
big topic in you know junior level
physics
um there is this thing physics education
technology from the university of
colorado and there's this great little
app that's on putting up on the screen
now
and you can play around with it in order
to
test precisely what kiara's talked about
there that
you can either shoot something up really
high
so that it comes down and hits point x
or you can
shoot it at a low trajectory and it will
also
land at that same point x the the
calculation of this are
simple and interesting because
projectile motion
brings together various aspects of
otherwise disparate areas of mathematics
algebra trigonometry are calculus if you
want to go down that road
as well back to the book and kyo writes
in both cases the ball describes a
parabola in the air but with different
maximum height depending upon
the initial condition the angle at which
the cannon is tilted initially
when the cannon is tilted at a high
angle the ball flies high and falls down
beyond the walls
if the cannon is tilted at a lower angle
the ball flies lower
and it can if the angle is right strike
the protective wall
in both cases the description of what is
going on is encapsulated
in the sequence of places the ball
traverses as time goes by
this set of places is the bull
trajectory
its path which is dictated by the laws
of motion
newton's law in this case in this
approach the explanation
for why the ball hits the target at the
end is given in terms of the places the
ball goes through
ultimately as i said in terms of its
initial position
and velocity the initial conditions of
the system's
motion since the dynamical law approach
is so powerful
it is natural to wonder whether it could
be extended to explain everything that
happens in our universe
including the whole universe itself in
other words
would a physical theory of the initial
conditions of the universe and of its
laws of motion
provide a satisfactory explanation for
everything in it
the answer as you are about to discover
is no
i shall point out that explanations in
the form of laws of motion and initial
conditions
are excellent for a special purpose i.e
to make predictions about what
happens on a sub-part of the universe
like
cannon or tennis balls marbles and
planets
but they cannot explain everything in
physical reality in fact
when regarded as an explanation of
everything they have serious problems
problems are fruitful things in physics
as they are in life
they hold the promise of improvement
when they are addressed properly
these problems are the very reason why
we have to venture
on our journey in the land of
counterfactuals as i said
the dynamical law type of explanation
looks like a sequence of snapshots it
has an initial
and a final snapshot and there are all
the snapshots in between
whose order is set by the laws of motion
the explanation for something happening
on an intermediate snapshot for example
the cannonball is suspended in the air
at the highest point of its trajectory
is in terms of what happens in the
snapshots before and after
that particular snapshot now if the
initial snapshot of the sequence reminds
you of the dog in the cosmology i
mentioned earlier in this chapter
you are quite right why should one have
a particular initial snapshot and not a
different one
surely there must be an additional
explanation for that
but that explanation cannot be itself in
the form
of initial conditions and laws of motion
it cannot be given
in terms of another sequence of
snapshots otherwise that explanation
would just look like adding another
sequence of snapshots to the existing
sequence placing it at the start of the
latter
but that new sequence in turn would
require an explanation for its own
initial snapshot
and so on in the dog-based explanation
this would correspond to supposing
dogs all the way down to explain the
first dog
the approach by initial conditions and
laws of motion taken in its strict form
is not a self-contained explanation for
the universe
adding sequences to the first sequence
or dogs to the first dog
does not help to address the problem
this problem is what philosophers call
in
infinite regress it is exactly the same
problem
that religious explanations for the
origin of the universe
run into pausing there just my
reflection wow that's really important
as an all-encompassing explanation
this dynamical laws and initial
conditions thing this thing that
physics has hitherto used so powerfully
and so well
nonetheless ultimately will fall into
infinite regress if it tries to be a
theory of everything another reason that
physics
is as it is can't explain everything
including physics
and chiara goes on to explain that god
suffers from the same thing if anyone
um says what explains the universe and
and they say well god
you know created the universe and of
course
reasonably you can ask well who created
god if they say and they usually do
nothing did well why not just take god
out and just say nothing created
the universe why have this additional
assumption
that doesn't actually explain anything
it's just
another unexplained thing and two
unexplained things do not create an
explanation
anyway back to the book and kiara
writes quote the issue of initial
conditions is a serious problem in
physics
which has long remained unsolved there
are currently some
viable proposals which constitute the
branch of physics called
cosmology these theories incidentally
are not even remotely comparable in
accuracy and sophistication
with other existing successful theories
such as
general relativity and quantum theory
they also suffer from
the impossibility of testing some of
their predictions the reason is
that they are all designed to agree that
the universe should look
exactly as we see it now and therefore
they are all confirmed by what we see
now but it is impossible to discriminate
between them by considering their
predictions for how the universe
should have looked at its origin because
it is impossible
to set up tests then this does not of
course mean that there could
not be any solution to the problem of
initial conditions but currently
we do not have a satisfactory one we
must therefore think of alternative ways
of looking at the problem the science of
canon can't provides a way because
unlike the traditional conception of
physics it does not rely on
initial conditions or laws of motion as
its fundamental
primitive elements when regarded as an
explanation for the whole universe
dynamical laws are not self-contained in
another important
sense imagine for example a collection
of pictures of the sphere rolling down
galileo's groove
taken in rapid succession say one every
second
to cover the whole motion as we've seen
what a dynamical law does is put them in
a particular order for instance
supposing that the pictures were
scattered in front of you you could use
the dynamical law
to line them up in a row one after
another according to its prescription
so you would write on the pictures 1 two
three according to what the law tells
you meaning
at time one the ball is at the top of
the slide at time two it starts sliding
down and so on
until it reaches the end at some time n
so to describe an ordered sequence of
snapshots one has to refer to an
external sequence a sequence of times
say whose elements are already ordered
by labels
1 2 3 and so on we have found again
an example of infinite regress the same
problem about ordering the scattered
snapshots reappears
for the sequence of end times we used to
order the scattered snapshots and so on
in general a dynamical law must refer to
some external entity
time which is used to order all the
events happening during the motion so
that they do not happen all at once
yet the existence of time is taken as
axiomatic and never properly explained
in terms of anything else
in addition recall galileo's experiment
in order to describe the motion of the
sphere
he had to time it with a clock but in
the case of the universe
this constitutes a problem what is the
clock
to time its evolution the universe
contains everything by definition
there cannot be anything external to it
let alone a clock
these are the two faces of the problem
of time which affects
all dynamical laws when regarded as
ultimate explanations
incidentally this problem also affects
laws as formulated in general relativity
where instead of a single external label
time
you have the set of labels specifying a
point in space time
the same problem presents itself as far
as space time itself
which is left unexplained here i do not
wish to expand on the solutions to this
problem my point is just this
whatever the solution of this problem
may be it cannot be given in terms of
initial conditions and dynamical laws
otherwise it falls into infinite regress
it must be given in terms of
some other kind of explanation some
proposed explanations already exist
if you are interested in reading about
them beautiful accounts are in julian
barber's magisterial treatise
the end of time and in michael
lockwood's intriguing book
the labyrinth of time kiara goes on to
point out that this
idea of initial conditions
and laws of physics where
given the initial conditions you can
then given the dynamical laws
predict the trajectory to predict
whatever's going to happen to the system
evolving over time
is in a sense a kind of
bias because you could easily choose
the end of the evolution of the system
as your
starting point and retrodict everything
that happened prior to that or indeed
pick any point
on the trajectory given the dynamical
laws and be able to predict
anything else on that trajectory okay
this is um
well known and we've talked about this
before so i'm skipping i'm skipping that
bit where
she explains that and then she goes on
to write quote
dynamical laws cannot handle specific
counterfactual
features of systems appearing in our
universe they cannot express them fully
and adequately
first there is the kind of
counterfactual that declares some
transformation to be
possible consider a specific
transformation
addition x and y
two numbers encoded in some numbering
system must be turned into the number
x plus y when we try to express the fact
that addition is possible
in the dynamical law approach we
encounter a number of subtle and
important problems
one way to express that addition is
possible
is to say that an adder is possible an
ideal adder is a machine that
when given any two numbers x and y
in input it gives output x plus y
and mind you it remains unchanged in its
ability to do that again
with other numbers the ability to work
in a cycle guarantees that the adder can
add again if needed
an approximate adder is included in any
smartphone calculator
i say approximate because after a
certain number of years the smartphone's
ability to add will wear out
and the precision of addition will
deteriorate
inevitably also the input will be
encoded in a limited number of digits
hence achieving only a limited precision
just pausing there just might quick
reflection on this
yes computers deteriorate over time they
are subject to all
the laws of physics entropy and so on
just general wear and tear
and so they will make errors and
as time goes on they'll make more and
more errors so there's no such thing as
any kind of
ideal program that the computer can
instantiate there's no
ideal adder even adding up simple
numbers is not going to be
perfectly able to be done by any
computer over a
sufficient period of time anyway back to
the book
car writes the possibility of an
adder i just realized that uh my accent
probably makes it
seem like i'm talking about the snake
the possibility of an adder
cannot be expressed fully if one wants
to explain everything in the universe
using only laws of motion and given
initial conditions as in the traditional
conception of physics
for a start by fixing a specific initial
condition
the universe evolves along a single
particular trajectory
set by the said initial condition no
ideal adder
will ever appear on that trajectory on
that trajectory there will only be
processes implementing approximate
adders
with limited precision where only a
fixed
finite set of inputs is ever added
before the approximate adder wears out
any particular instance of an
approximate adder lasts only a finite
time
and will only ever add a given sequence
of input numbers
otherwise we would have a violation of
the condition that the laws are no
design
as i explained in the first chapter that
an adder is possible
or that addition is possible means far
more than that
first it means that the adder when given
as input to any two numbers
can output their sum this fact refers to
any two numbers
never mind whether they are actually
given as input to it in reality once the
trajectory is selected
second that an adder is possible means
that there is no limitation to how well
it can be approximated
by any of the approximate adders but
this fact once more cannot be expressed
within the traditional conception of
physics
because the latter can at most say what
happens
to a particular instance of an
approximate adder if it occurs on the
trajectory of the universe
it is going to be true on each of the
possible trajectories for each of the
allowed initial conditions
so even the enumeration of all possible
scenarios
that would happen if a given initial
condition were to be set
would not express the possibility of an
adder either another type of
counterfactual that cannot be
accommodated in the dynamical law
approach
is the fact that something is impossible
think of the principle of conservation
of energy which tells us
that a perpetual motion machine is
impossible in the dynamical law
type of approach one can only say that a
perpetual motion machine
does not happen that means that no point
on the trajectory of the universe
contains one given a particular initial
condition
but that a perpetual motion machine is
impossible does not mean it does not
happen under a particular initial
condition
it means that it cannot be built under
any of the initial conditions
and any of the actual dynamical laws
this statement is much more powerful
and categorical than any of the
statements one can make about what
happens on a particular trajectory
okay i'm just skipping a little and then
chiara goes on to right
a final problem about the dynamical law
approach
is that it seems on the face of it to
conflict with the existence of entities
that are capable of making choices such
as you and me
every omniscient narrator knows this the
omniscient narrator
is the entity that tells the story in a
novel in the third person
the narrator knows all the thoughts of
the characters in advance
their ideas are set from the very
beginning of the novel
choices only look like true choices to
the characters
but in fact they are predetermined and
fixed by the narrator's plans
likewise the explanation based in terms
of motion and initial conditions
would seem to imply that so must be ours
our choices and everything else
depending on them seem already to have
been set in advance they are written in
the dynamical law explanation
and fixed by the initial condition of
the universe the dynamical laws
sequence of events fixes everything it
is given once and for all
all your ideas are laid out there there
seems to be no
room for them to be unpredictable as
they should be if they were truly
free choices we have just outlined what
is called a
deterministic nightmare the fact that
there does not seem to be any room for
free choice
if one presupposes the existence of a
fixed
predetermined story for our universe
which is the picture that the
traditional conception of physics
in terms of dynamical laws and initial
conditions
seems to suggest for example whether
tomorrow you will have croissants or
kippers for breakfast
has been fixed at the start of the
universe in its initial conditions
the same goes for the fact that you are
reading this text right now instead of
some other book or maybe doing something
else altogether such as watching your
favorite show
all determined at the beginning of the
universe down to the precise words typos
included
unpredictability of action or free will
is therefore another counterfactual that
the dynamical law approach does not seem
to be able to accommodate
we do not yet know how to accommodate
exactly free will in physics
but that only means we have to think
harder this problem
exists but it is not insoluble it only
appears to be so
if contemplated from the narrow
dynamical law
type of approach pausing there my
reflection what will exactly
and then i would go one step further and
say
only to some people um
i've always kind of thought
that even if okay here's a two until
you know i'm coming to understand
constructive theory a little better
that even if we had this dynamical law
approach to physics even if that was
true and that was the only way to
consider physics
we could still have free will you know
i'm kind of with daniel dennett but for
different reasons daniel dennett is
something called a compatibilist
i'm a compatible a lot of people say
well compatibilism
is irrational given we know that
the laws of physics determine everything
that's going to happen
but do the does that mean that
everything is reducible to laws of
physics for example the evolution of
species the evolution of species happens
because
evolution by natural selection actually
creates a certain kind of knowledge
the knowledge of how genes can survive
in certain
organisms in certain niches to enable
to create different organisms and so on
and so forth
in other words i i endorse a certain
kind of
creativity an emergent simplicity
and i think that free will is just a way
of talking about
this emergent kind of simplicity the
emergence simplicity in this case is the
existence of choices that exist in the
world
nothing can defy the laws of physics but
at the same time
the laws of physics don't explain
everything and what we're after when it
comes to human behavior is
explanations not merely predictions that
even if you could predict
people's behavior you wouldn't have an
explanation of their behaviour
the explanation their behaviour would
come down to their personal creativity
and all of this has summaries you you
have to do some linguistic gymnastics in
order to avoid this term free will
and if you do avoid the term free will
you're still left with this deep deep
mystery
i've talked about this ad nauseum i
think that free will is tied intimately
to
knowledge creation therefore it's got
something to do with epistemology and
now
you know i'm hoping that it appears
we'll have a clearer understanding of it
given constructed theory given the
science of can and can't
and what we're saying here is that if we
want to understand this more want to
understand this mystery of
what a human is making choices creating
knowledge
having free will we need to move beyond
dynamical laws that's holding us back
it's leading to a lot of
what i would say are misconceptions
anyway kiara goes on to say quote
fortunately the dynamical law approach
is not the only way to provide
explanations and predictions
why should all good explanations look
like
chronologically ordered stories which
unfold from beginning to end
the fact that something has happened
before something else need not be the
whole explanation for how systems work
in physical reality
end quote the next part of the book
is many pages that i'm going to skip
it's about chess and basically
kiara uses the analogy to chess to talk
about how
certain moves are possible or impossible
and this can help to explain the
evolution over time
of the game rather than simply
understanding
what will happen given what you saw
happen
during the game understanding chess in
other words means understanding
that pawns can do this and bishops can
do that but not these other moves for
example
okay back to the book and kiara writes
can this logic adopting counterfactuals
be fruitful in physics other than in my
elementary example
indeed in physics and science in general
we already resort to modes of
explanation
other than dynamical laws some of them
adopting counterfactuals
what we have in place is in fact a
hybrid approach
for example physics resorts to
principles like the conservation of
energy
which as i said are about
counterfactuals too these principles
are not in the form of dynamical laws
they are statements that require certain
things to be
impossible such as perpetual motion
machines
yet they can be as powerful as dynamical
laws at generating predictions
a famous example is the prediction of
the existence of the neutrino
a previously unknown elementary particle
this prediction is akin to the
prediction of neptune's existence
but this time it was a prediction of the
existence of a subatomic particle not a
planet
and the prediction was generated from a
principle not a dynamical law
the prediction was obtained by reasoning
that without that particle
the law of conservation of energy would
be violated
it couldn't have been obtained from a
dynamical law
because the laws of motion of neutrinos
were not known until much later
principles also appear in newton's laws
only the second law is a dynamical law
relating the force of a system
to acceleration and mass but the other
two laws are not really dynamical in
their existing formulation
the first law is a hybrid one it says
that is impossible for a system to
change its state of motion
when it is not acted upon by a force
hence the system will continue in its
given state of motion until some force
intervenes
the law does refer to dynamical laws via
the concept of
state of motion but it mandates like a
principle
that some transformations are impossible
specifically those
changing the state of motion of a system
without it being acted on by a force
the third law is even closer to being a
pure principle
informally it requires to every action
there must correspond at opposite
in direction and equal in magnitude
reaction
if while on a walk in the park your dog
is pulling you ahead by the leash
you are pulling the dog back with an
equal and opposite pull this fact is
necessitated by the principle included
in third law
not by a specific dynamical law wouldn't
it be wonderful
if it were possible to take inspiration
from these principles which relate to
counterfactuals
and imagine an entirely different way to
formulate the laws of physics
one that takes counterfactuals as
primitive and the laws of motion and
initial conditions as derivative
one could even conjecture that this new
mode might solve the open problems in
the dynamical law approach
as well as fill in the gaps in existing
theories while still covering
all their predictions the kind of
explanation i am imagining
which is that provided by the science of
canon can't is even more radical than
the hybrid type of explanation which we
currently use in physics
it places counterfactuals at the most
fundamental level
then it explains dynamical laws and
initial conditions
in terms of them these laws of motion
can then be used to make testable
predictions about cannibals and
electrons much as they are now
but their underlying explanations would
be in terms of principles about
counterfactuals
and this could provide a solution to the
infinite regress type of problems i
mentioned earlier
e.g resorting to an infinite set of
initial conditions
just as the counter factual properties
of the chess piece about what moves are
possible and what are impossible
can explain draws on a chess board
so count of actual properties can
explain why the universe is in a certain
state
avoiding mention of the initial
conditions altogether
both statements about possibility and
impossibility are equally important
you'll see several examples of laws
about possibility and impossibility in
the chapters to come
these may seem like bold speculations
and they are
the first time i encountered the idea of
reformulating physics with
counterfactuals was in a proposal by the
physicist david deutsch
at the time i thought it was fascinating
but crazy
that was during my doctoral studies in
oxford when to put it as
alice in wonderland would i started
trying to imagine
as many as six impossible things before
breakfast
that idea was one of them but within a
few months david and i
were working together on a paper
developing this idea and applying it to
information theory
and after my doctorate i decided to
focus completely
on pushing it further to try to address
various unsolved problems in physics
by then i was convinced its promise was
enormous
my research to date with the help of a
few brave students and a handful of
other physicists
has concentrated on putting this
approach to the test in the following
chapters
i shall explore the problems that this
approach has solved so far
and its potential to solve further
problems it's time to journey deeper
into the land of counterfactuals
end quote end of chapter two that's
fantastic so this is a really optimistic
positive
vision for the future of physics and the
future of science more broadly
i can't wait to continue reading this
but this has been a
longish episode if my if my time is
correct
and so i'll finish it up there today and
look forward to seeing you in
episode four of my readings and
reflections on the science of canon
cards
by kiara maleto based upon
work initiated by david deutsch till
next time
[Music]
you